It usually starts with a moment of silence. All right, why don't we get started? It's my greatest pleasure to use YouSoon today. YouSoon is one of our own. In fact, actually, you and I go back many years. We met in 2014 when I was faculty at WashU. And back then, I was teaching a graduate level class in machine learning. And there was one kid who always knew all the answers. Whenever I asked a question, there was one guy who knew it. No matter how hard it was, that was you. Otherwise, it would be a boring story. Oh, my god. So at the time, I was like, this has got to be a new PhD student. And I got to try to check him out and try to get him into my group. And the funny thing is, a few months later, actually, a few weeks later, I talked with my wife. She didn't have TAs back then, so we were grading at home. My wife and I are grading. And she was grading her midterm. And she tells me, oh, there's this, can you believe it? In my midterm, the kid who has the highest score very far is a freshman. And I was like, wow. His name is YouSoon. I was like, oh, never heard of him. It wouldn't be in my class. I teach graduate level class. And then, actually, a week later, there's Professor Jeremy, who actually didn't like me very much because I once stole his grad student, you know, his favorite student. And he came to me and was like, you know, Kylian, by the way, I'm still mad that you stole Jake, but I found a new student. He's amazing. You know, just hands off that one, right? Otherwise, I'd never talk to you again. His name is YouSoon. I was like, you know, I wouldn't know him. I only teach graduate. Anyway, well, a few days later, you actually come to my office hours. I'm like, oh, you're the kid who knows everything, right? You're a PhD student. I want to record you. He's like, no, actually, I'm a freshman. And so I was like, wait, do you take my West class? Are you working with Jeremy? And I'm like, OK, you know what? What's your deal? His deal was basically, do you remember this? Like, his plan was he took eight classes at the same time. Some of them actually literally at the same time. I don't know how he did this. Besides, he had like some ring from Hermione Gratia or something. And his plan was to graduate in two years. And he only had A's and A-classes. And I told you, this is the dumbest thing I've ever heard. That's what you said, yeah. Why did you only take four classes and spend the rest of your time in my lab? I give you a desk in my lab. And the rest is history. You just joined my lab. Jeremy never talked to me again. And we actually published many, many papers together. And it was really, really fun. The crazy thing is actually, I'll do it fine for this. Back then, we actually didn't call him Yu. We called him Yu. Yu Sun was how he introduced himself. And that worked well, except it made horrible, a little horrible misunderstanding. And the very, very worst one was when I actually, in the upper two years, I got an offer from Cornell. And I decided to go to Cornell. And I had two grad students, Jake, Matt, and I had Yu in my lab. And I first told Matt, I'm going to Cornell. You can come with me if you want to. And I told Yu, I'm going to Cornell. You're an undergrad. Tell me what to do. Then I talked to Jake. And I told Jake, by the way, to take you something I accepted an offer at Cornell, I'm going to take Matt with me. But it breaks my heart. And I can't take Yu with me. But I meant obviously it's him. But Jake actually suddenly burst into tears and was like, why? And I was like, I don't really know. It's not really possible, right? He was like, well, I'm taking Matt with you. I said, well, Matt is a PhD student. He was like, well, I'm a PhD student. Well, that doesn't help you, does it? It was this really horrible conversation that lasted on for way too long. I think Jake still sees a psychologist because of it. Eventually he cleared it up. And we decided actually that day that we all go with Yu, the Yu song, which I think is actually the Chinese pronunciation. Anyway, Yu actually petitioned to transfer. And he actually came to Cornell with our group. And we spent another two years here at Cornell and published even more. When he was done, I think we published four papers together. I think each one has over 1,000 citations. So every single one was a really, really big problem that we solved together. It was really, really fun. When he was done, he went to grad school to Berkeley. Berkeley, as far as I think, people told me the first few years he went around and searched for a really, really, really big problem and then found it. And today he will talk about it. And he worked there with Aljosha and Moritz Hart, that I'm sure a lot of you know. And right now he's at Stanford doing a postdoc with Carlos Gustrand. And he is the father of test time training, which has now taken off and has become a really, really big deal. And I'm really looking forward to hearing about it. Thank you, Yu. Thank you for the introduction. Thank you. Okay, so let me start a bit with myself. So I grew up in the province of China. And Confucius, Yu was one of our ancestors. And Confucius, people tell me that, my teachers tell me at least, that he invented the idea of tests or exams. And perhaps as a consequence, our province is really, really big, really serious about tests or exams. And over here it says at the level of natural secrets. So look, these armed guards are trying to move the tests that will be a matter to the students. And because the tests were so protected and there was just so much to study in my province, when studying I always have to guess the test problem. Basically, when American kids are betting on baseball, they'd be betting on the test problems. When I'm testing, I look at the test, I'm always praying that the next test problem is similar to something that I have studied. I came to America when I was 13, and I had a great discovery. America does take-home tests. And what's great about take-home tests is that you can learn the relevant content while you are taking the test. There's no guesswork. And just to give you an example, so when I was taking CAR 6 machine learning theory class, the test was to complete 10 problems, 10 stars of problems from a list, and the list was given to us in the first week of class. There's no guesswork. What's even more amazing is there is this problem that is an open problem in machine learning, and if we just prove this saying, we could get an A plus in the first week of class. Well, so people might ask, why would America survive this take-home test? There's no rigor. You call a take-home test in America, in China we call it cheating. If you try to do this in China, you'll get shot by the armed guards, and CAR 6 will be put in jail, and nothing will work out. It's bad for the country. Well, tests, at least good ones, they should be a proxy of the real world. And in the real world, people are usually learning on their own, just like in take-home tests. Maybe it's speaking a language. When I first came, I wasn't great at English. I mean, it's better, and it's because I've had all these years of tests in America, and maybe it's driving, and maybe the most extreme form is research. Think about this guy, Andrew Wiles. So he spent nine years trying to prove Fermat's last serum, and he started, really, he knew about the problem when he was 10 years old. That's when he decided to be a mathematician. And, you know, he later became a professor and spent just nine years on that single problem. So really, his entire life after age 10 was just a big take-home test. Now, how do people approach testing in machine learning? What are the analogies in machine learning? So when I started this line of research in 2019, machine learning already has three stages. That's the year when they had BERT and GPT-1. We had pre-training, where you try to get general knowledge from the Internet. You have fine tuning that's domain-specific. And then during testing, you deploy a fixed model. Machine learning today, we have a cooler name for fine tuning. It's now called post-training. And the scales are dramatically different. But still, we have to be guessing the test instance while doing post-training. You know, companies do that through market research or they just have the benchmarks. But, you know, during testing, you still have this fixed model that's passively sort of praying that whatever it sees, right, it needs to be similar to something that it has trained on. Otherwise, all bets are off. So really, for all the past time in machine learning, you know, most of the work focused on training before you see the test instance. So the moment when the test instance arrives, when the user gives a query to your model, is really a defining moment in machine learning. And, you know, after that, people will normally think, you know, testing is pretty boring, right? The interesting part happens before this boundary. And my main argument is that, you know, machine learning in the future is really being trained after you see the test instance. Because that's when you can let go of all the guesswork. Now you say, but like, what can you do at test time? The model is already fixed. You know, pre-training, post-training, all these interesting things. But what if you allow the model ways to be trained at test time? And this is a lot of research that I started in 2019. So let's zoom into that. And I still like to use, you know, my favorite example that is, you know, Car 6 Plus. Let's say, you know, that in this list, right, there is a test problem, right? And, you know, Car 6 gives you his lecture notes. And this problem is solved once you understand the lecture notes. Because, you know, it's designed to be a good class. You can actually solve the problems. So this is really the simple say of test time training. And the core problem here is how to efficiently process a lot of relevant data and all the lecture notes, textbooks, given at test time. Now you might ask, what's the hard setting? The hard setting is, of course, that there's no relevant data at test time, right? No lecture notes, you know? And this can happen because Car 6 might not even know the answer, right? Like, may you have an open problem. You know, there's no material to lead up to it. There's no context. This is a hard setting. And it's very hard, but we know that humans can do it. In fact, that's exactly what Andrew Wiles did for nine years. So we're also going to give it a try. So that's the outline of today. We're going to have a simple setting where we have both the test problem and the data, and a hard setting where you have a, perhaps, open research problem. There's no relevant data. Cool. So let's dive in. Let's dive into the simple setting. And just to remind you, you know, it's simple because the test problem is solvable once you understand the relevant data. So really, the data is the focus here, right? And the goal is to efficiently process a lot of relevant data given at test time. Now, machine learning has a special word for relevant data given at test time. You know, at training time, you just call it data. At test time, we call it context. Okay? And when there's a lot of context, we call it long context. It's just a special name for a lot of relevant data given at test time. And the long context problem is very valuable. In a lot of applications, you can have, you know, say a large legal case, you know, a large legal case, and you want to put out the talking points, you want to find bugs in higher code bases or you have, you know, many histories with interactions with users. And people try very hard on this problem because, you know, it's very valuable, especially for enterprises. In fact, you know, there's basically a consensus in industry that long context is one of the most economically valuable problems in machine learning today and one of the biggest bottlenecks. So how does it become a bottleneck? Why? After all, I mean, during, at training time, when we are given a lot of data, we know what to do about it, right? We just run rating descent on the model. How come that at test time, when we call it a different word, it's called context, maybe you don't know what to do about it. Well, that's because, at least in the old days, in the old rules of machine learning, you cannot change the model ways at test time anymore, right? So people come up with all kinds of workarounds so we can use this data without changing the model ways. And, you know, the most well known is called self-attention, which is the main component in transformers. So let me give a, you know, one minute primer on self-attention. So, you know, transformers are a core building block of self-attention and which stores the embedding of every word in a growing list. For those of you who are familiar with the literature, the list is called a KV cache, key value cache. And let's do a simple example. So suppose you have, you know, the first five words of the lecture notes, and your goal is to process all of them into, you know, each word into this embedding, this feature embedding. So suppose we've already processed two words. Now, for the third word, we first have this initial embedding over here. Then we need to compare it, right, this same, with each of the previous embeddings before in order to use the previous words as context, right? Now you have to then collect back all the comparisons in order to get the process embedding of this new word. Okay, so you do that, it costs three units of compute. And then for the next word, you do this because, you know, the list has gotten longer, right, and now costs more compute. And as the list goes on and on, right, grows longer and longer, each token just gets more expensive. So the cost per word, right, to be concrete grows linearly with longer context, and that's the bottom. So here, you know, 128,000 is roughly the length of a big code base. And here you see that as a transformer, by us read more and more of the code base, right, its speed per token gets worse over time. That's why long context has been a hard problem. Now, people come up with this workaround, right? One of these is called sliding window. It's very simple. Instead of, you know, comparing to every token that's before me, why don't I just only compare to the most recent few tokens? Then I no longer have, you know, then I'm no longer using a growing list, right? And that's why sliding window has constant cost per word, right? But of course, this is not free because, you know, you're now really giving up a lot of the previous context, right? You're throwing away all the information outside your window, and you can see it in this plot. So x-axis is the same, you're not growing context lines, right? And over here, just so we can clearly see the trend, I'm benchmarking the loss of everyone against data transformers. That's the orange line. So that's why the orange line itself is flat at zero, right? And you can see that when it comes to language modeling loss, that's the y-axis. You see that sliding window gets worse loss in longer context. Any questions at this point about this pair of plus? All right. So let me go on. Now, the holy grail of long context modeling is how to be flat in both patterns. This is important for scaling to longer context. And they're having many attempts, probably hundreds if not thousands of papers, you know, in this area. And let me pick the two most well-known ones. So one is called Mamba and another one called Gated Delta Net. You know, both have been deployed in frontier models at this stage. And you see that they have a better offset than sliding window over here. But really, the slope, the problem is scaling is the same. Now, let's think about how we might go about this problem. This is the same slide as I've shown before. And, you know, just to remind you, right, during training we didn't really have a lot of problems with a lot of data because we were doing gradient descent on the model. And this problem, this long context, really arises because we're trying to find the workarounds, which in turn is because the old rules of machine learning dictate that we can't change the model ways at test time. So, I mean, I guess the simple idea is, you know, what if we also do gradient descent on the model at test time? And this started with my work in 2024. And since then, there have been many, many direct follow-ups from both industry and academia. And, you know, this line of work has heavily influenced the modern revival of continued learning. And today I'll just talk about the simplest and perhaps most effective instantiation. So, how should we do gradient descent on a model at test time? So, now let's take a long sequence of words given at test time. So, this is a test sequence. And let me just take the sliding window transformer that had constant latency, but worse loss. And instead of only doing a forward pass on the sliding window transformer, as it processes the first window of tokens, I'm going to do both a forward pass and a backward pass. And now, as it moves on to the second window of words, the first window of words has been stored in the weights of this model because of the backward pass. And as you move on to the second window, you do the same thing, and then you move on to the third, and so on and so forth. And as you have gone through this entire sequence, you have done a lot of forward and backward passes, each on a limited window of words. And the hope is that by the time you are here, even though you're only attending to this little chunk of words, all of these words before have been stored in your weights already. Now, compare this to a transformer with sliding windows, sorry, with self-attention, full attention over the entire context, that only does a giant forward pass. Two questions. First, I mean, you have all of these errors, all of these errors in the slide before. Is this really faster than just doing this one giant forward error? And the second is, are all of these errors before able to retain the information, as I said. So let's go back to the slide. And just as a reminder, we want to be flat in both panels over here. And let's look at latency first. Indeed, because we need to take into account both training, both the forward time and the backward time at test time, the latency is worse compared to just the green thing alone, because maybe we also need to do backwards. But it is still constant latency. It is still flat. And when you have 128,000 long context, it is 2.7 times faster than just doing a single forward pass of a transformer with full context. Even though we're taking into account all the forward and backward errors. Now, there's an important detail in order to make a rest on the other pad. So in regular machine learning, I'm just using the analogy of testing and take-home tests. Now, in regular machine learning, there are regular tests. You want to do well on the tests. So during training, you're really doing some practice tests. Now, for our method, we have converted the test, where you are not allowed to change your model, into a take-home test, where you are now allowed to change the model with. So you want to do well on take-home tests. And now if you just do the old-fashioned practice tests during training, well, it's practicing a different skill. Doing take-home tests is really its own skill. And during training, we will do the analogy of practice take-home tests. And in machine learning, the term for this is called learning to learn, or meta-learning. And this is an important detail that we need to pay attention to at training time. After you deal with this detail, you see that this method also is left in this panel. And this is the first method that I've seen with this sort of scale and behavior. Question, please. So when you're doing this test time training, what is the sort of loss function you're backpropagating on? Just next-token prediction. And I have another sort of follow-up. Maybe it's sort of a test time training. But I guess one difference between when you're doing this test time training versus sort of standard training is that the data is no longer IID. Yes. So is that sort of, I guess, does that play into the reason for doing this learning to learn in some sense? As the data, yes. I think that's, you know, I import the same. That's different from regular training. Basically, you want to get used to this fact during training time. Yes. It's a good intuition. So if you add back all the other methods, right, you see that, you know, all the methods with constant latency, test time training really has a very large difference in terms of performance because of the different scaling behavior as you have longer content. All right. So, you know, that finishes the simple setting. There you have, you know, both the data and the test problem. Now what about the hard setting where you don't have the data? Just to put it... Please. Where does the drop from orange to blue come from? From, yeah, from 8K context list. So for 8K context list, blue is in fact spending more compute than orange. In fact, you know, compared to orange, because our sliding window size is 800, that's why you see that, you know, for sliding window. I'm surprised it's so constant. The difference between blue and orange is so constant. You basically get... Somehow you get a benefit from doing these 8K forward... That's right. Point backward passes. More actually does not help you, surprisingly. But if you do 16K, there's no additional benefit. At some point, basically, if you go to zero, right, the two methods are identical. Okay. So I think this happens because I'm benchmarking everybody against orange. So everybody's absolute loss is dropping. As you have longer context, you get better loss. What matters is, you know, does your loss, do you benefit as much from long context as the full attention model? And the important thing is that we benefit as much as possible. Yeah, okay. Right, right. Yeah, that's good. Actually, that's very important. Yes, okay. All right. So now let's move on to the hard thing. And just to put it in different words, right, in the simple setting, you know, you have your life experience so far, but Karthik hands you the lecture note. And as long as, you know, you apply yourself and actually learn the lecture stuff, you'll be able to solve, you know, at least a one-star exercise. But in the hard setting, right, Karthik doesn't give you the lecture note or, you know, it's an open research problem that's outside of the boundary of all existing human knowledge and Karthik doesn't even know the answer. In fact, this might be, you know, a definition of research. So how do you approach this? In machine learning, we have an abstraction for this sort of idea. It's called out-of-distribution generalization. And basically that test instance is not represented by the training data. And when I first studied this topic in 2018, you know, the models weren't powerful enough to discover new proofs, so I was working on this abstraction in another application, this object recognition. Okay, so we will be training on ImageNet and then testing on ImageNet on a snowy day. And you wouldn't have access to any snowy day, you know, image during a training, okay? You wouldn't know that it would be snowy. So how do you deal with this problem? Well, first of all, you observe that for the state-of-the-art models, right, if you train on regular ImageNet and test on a snowy day, you have automatic performance score. But if you were to cheat, you know, if you were to remove the distribution shift, right, you just train and test both on a snowy day, then there's no fault. So would it be nice if we had some training data on a snowy day? Well, in fact, we have one. That's this test instance over here. The only thing is it is this side of the boundary. So you've got to be willing to use that test instance to update your model. But this input is just an unlabeled input, right? It has no label. That's why it's a test instance. So how do you generate data for this unlabeled test instance to do the test time training? Well, in 2019, my idea was to use self-supervised learning. And let me just give you a short illustration. So yeah, you want to do object recognition. You feed this image to your network, and it says the wrong category. Okay, what can I do? Well, in deep learning, the newer networks, you really learn intermediate feature representations of this image in order to arrive at the final answer. And, you know, let's say that everything up to, you know, the end of the rest stuff is your feature representation. So the wrong prediction really happens, you know, often because you have bad features. The idea of self-supervised learning is to improve the features with only unlabeled input. And let me make some space here and show you an example that's called mass reconstruction. So I'm going to apply a random mask to this image over here and feed it to this network. And in order to do reconstruction, I have to give it a reconstruction head. It's a different head from the yellow thing, right? And the reconstruction head would output a reconstruction of the original image. And the goal of training for this self-supervised learning task is to better reconstruct the original image. So you compare them. They don't quite look the same. And you train the network. Now they look pretty much the same, and it's because you have fixed those features. They now have to be pretty good features. So given the features, now you can put back the main cost head and hopefully get the right prediction. And if not, you just repeat this process with another random mask to get even better features. So you just keep doing this over and over again. And as you take gradient steps on the self-supervised task, you see that you actually get better accuracy on the main task. And this is gradient steps at test time on a single image using the self-supervised task. This was one of the earliest cases of test time compute in deep learning. And that was 2019. That was five years before the idea was popularized by the lazy models. Okay, that's cool. But it's only object recognition. So how does this idea work for hard problems in science and engineering that I was motivating to talk with? Now let's first think about how humans solve these hard problems. Here's an idea we can all relate to. So consider the first really hard programming assignment. And it's hard because you have your life so far. You go to the homeworks and go to the lectures. But this assignment is just very different from what the instructor has given you so far. So what do you do? Well, you have to at least try. You will take some guesses, get some partial signal. And then critically, you will have to sit back and internalize this experience to try. Otherwise, you're just a student that's brute force hacking the autograin. So in AI terms, the first will be called search, and the second is learn. Now prior work, I've done search. Concretely, just prompting the LLM over and over again. And one example is AlphaEvo from Google DeepMind, if you have heard of it. Our work does training on the new experience from this single prompt. So how do we do it concretely? Let me use GPU kernel engineering as an example. So a test prompt would be a piece of PyPort code. You want to write a CUDA kernel that has the same functionality of this PyPort code, but it's faster. And how fast the kernel runs would be your reward. So just setting up the problem here. I'm going to be plotting a bunch of wrong time, and the best human kernel has that sort of wrong time. And if you just... And we will be showing actual over-reported in a popular competition called GPU mode. And if you just search, let's say sample that many solutions from this LLM. This is your search distribution, and this is the max of search. Best from drawing that many search samples. And our main idea is, let's break this search down into 50 rounds and make the policy learn during these rounds. So the budget would be the same, except that we would have learned. How does it work? So first let's sample one fifth of the total budget. They say the zero, so you'll get a similar distribution at search because it's the same policy, right? But then you get say one, that's the updated policy by learning all the solutions over there, re-weighted by their rewards. So as you do this over and over again, you see that you can expect the kernel, see what the policy has been able to learn. And say the 10, now you already have a solution that can apply the idea and make the procedure to writing kernels. And say the 20 has learned how to fuse all the core operations in this kernel. That's why the distribution are moving further and further to be faster as we search. And finally, after 50 steps, we have a solution that beats the best tool. That's it. Very simple. Now, here's the part that's slightly more complicated, is that you see that the distribution are getting wider and wider, right? They're all getting wider at least than the initial set. Why is that? First of all, that's sort of desired, right? In classical RL, you normally end up classing to just the best solution, because in classical RL, you want to output a policy that has good reward on that. But in this case, we really care about the tail over here. As long as we have a good solution in the tail, it doesn't matter what the rest of the distribution looks like. So really, we have an extreme case of exploration, and in our RL objective, we put the exploration into the objective instead of doing the normal strategies such as epsilon-green. Or in detail, to make the same work in practice. Can I have a question? Can you go a bit deeper into the difference between what you're doing and reinforcement learning? It seems like the objective is very similar. Is the precise loss formulation different, or is there something else that's... I guess I don't have a good sense of thought. Okay. Let me expand all this detail. In classical RL, your output of learning is a policy. And concretely, you want this policy to give good reward over many draws of the solution. Good average reward. Over here, the output is not quite a policy. A policy is only a vehicle towards the ultimate goal of getting a good artifact, namely a good kernel, over here. And what kind of a policy would be a good vehicle towards this goal? Well, you want a policy that has actually very heavy tape. Even if the average reward is very, very bad, as long as over, let's say, 1,000 draws, the policy is able to produce one amazing solution, you're in good shape. Can I ask a follow-up? How do you train this so that that happens? So that it explodes... Yeah. So exploration is an old-standing problem in RL, and people have all kinds of tricks for it, such as epsilon-grading. People happen to know about it. But just because exploration is so important in this context, the most principled way is to just change the RL object. So the most principled but intractable way is to say instead of averaging over the... Sorry, instead of optimizing for the average reward, let's say, over 1,000 draws, I optimize for the max reward over 1,000 draws. But that's intractable. It's going to be very unstable. It's not a very practical thing. So machine learning people have all kinds of tricks for this. So we can do a softmax, for example. Law of sum EXP. And you can have a hyperparameter that controls how soft this map is. That's exactly our object. Let's call it the entropic utility, and we paint the hyperparameter adaptively. Can I answer your question? Awesome. And thanks for the question. Yes, please. No. Please. I was wondering... I mean, this reminds me of... You may be familiar with such solvers. Yes. Certifiability, where they explore the heavy tails by doing, you know, randomized runs and restarts. But you appear to have a deterministic, or do you still inject some randomization? Yeah. So all of the tools from the policy are random. And that's quite important, actually, because we want to sort of explore different parts of the space, and randomness helps us explore the space. I think that's the similarity you're talking about. And you get heavy tails, really. Yes, in terms of reward. All these are real data. So this is the empirical observations. Any other questions? Please. It kind of looks like the distributions are getting narrower, not wider. On the left, it's like a thousand microseconds difference. On the right, it's like a hundred microseconds difference. And they look wider sort of because of the way that it's plotted. Yeah, so this is a good observation, right? So if you have runtime, how do you use it as a reward? Runtime is really lower than that. So as a reward, you have to do one over-runtime. And that's the reward. Do I make sense here? And over here, I'm plotting at scale the actual reward, which is one over-runtime. And the reason you see that the difference in runtime is getting smaller is just an artifact, sort of, of the reward construction. All right. Yeah, thanks for the careful observation. Cool. All right. Any other questions? Please. So here, you want to compare two approaches. One is prompting a language model. So for 50,000 tries, you get some solution, some distribution. And so you compare that with updating every 50 steps? That's right. Right. But I mean, you get 1,000 milliseconds. At what point do you know this is the right time to stop? Or can I continue going? You can continue going. It's really just a matter of your compute budget. You can say that, you know, once I'm top of the leaderboard, which means I've beaten the best human, I want to stop. But you don't have to. You can just keep going. Did I answer your question? Or do you have something else? I guess there must be some point at which, like, the model... Do you think there is some point where the model does not, cannot discover anything new? Yes. Cannot optimize it further? Yeah. I mean, there must be some point. You know what I mean? The wrong line is... You cannot push it below zero. There must be some point. Now, I think the hardest of this research is that it's difficult to tell whether... You know, if you plateau, right? Whether that plateau is because the problem is inherently at its... At its boundary, right? Or because your method isn't good enough. I think that's just something I discovered that's inherent to discovery problems. So I wouldn't be able to give you an exact answer. All right? Yes, please. So the fact that the tail on the left goes all the way to your original distribution, that's not an artifact, right? The... So if you look at the tail of, like, all the way to theta 50, all the way up to, like, theta zero, all of them on the left, as well, they go all the way to your initial distribution. And I'm assuming that's not an artifact. The tail will go all the way... Yeah, you mean, like, even for... You're saying even for, say, the 50, the tail of this distribution might go all the way here. So that's not an artifact. Yeah, that's not an artifact. That's, you know, that could potentially be a little thing. So then that should tell you the limit of how easy it is to discover more solutions more and more to the right, because you're stretching out more thin. Oh, I see. You are saying, right, if I were to... Are you saying that if I were to sample more from, let's say, let's say... Yeah, let's say if your theta 20... Sorry, theta 200 and more are going to go more and more to the right, and you're going to stretch the distribution more thin. So the probability of finding kind of the higher, the faster solutions is going to become dropped dramatically. I see. Now, I have to say, there are some... You know, so this... I think that's a reasonable prediction, given the plots we have seen so far. But, like, it could as well be that, you know, the policy discovers a crazy solution that's, let's say, based on something that's all the way over here, right? But, you know, you do some little change, boom, it goes, like, all the way here. It's not impossible. But, yeah, you're right. Based on the plots so far, visa. All right. So let me go on. So we have results, you know, besides kernel engineering for mathematics, a bunch of math problems, and, you know, algorithm design, biology, and, you know, our method discovers the best solution for all of these problems we attempted. And let me just use, you know, Erdish's minimum overlap, this metaphor, as an example. This was one of the problems, you know, showcased in the AlphaEvolve paper. So the best previous human, you know, had that bound, so, you know, the lower the better, right? And if you use Gemini 2.0 Pro, and you think, whatever, blah, blah, plus AlphaEvolve, you get this results. Now, Harry Tao, you know, collaborated with Google DeepMind to get this results, more recent results, with Gemini 2.5 Pro, and, you know, AlphaEvolve. That was December 2025, and it further improved the bound before, right? So if you just use an open source model to do a search, right? So this was an open source model from, you know, from OPI about half a year ago. It's not great. But if you do test time training, this is our result. You'll be all the previous results by a very large margin. So really, you know, doing test time training seems, in this case, more important than the Gemini output. Okay. So, do you have a question? Okay. Harry Tao. We often have questions. Okay, so... So... And we got this without even looking at the baseline solutions, but they're not others. All right, so I'm basically out of time here, so let me wrap up. As I said, then the test instance arrives, right? This is really a defining moment in machine learning. And most of machine learning in the past have worked on how to train their model before test instance arrives, and as a consequence, they all have to form their guesses about what the test instance will be. And the main idea of my research was test time training. It's to train your model after the test instance arrives. And I've talked about a simple setting that is given the relevant data, such as current six lecture notes. How do you scale with longer and longer contents, as you have seen in this pair of plots? Now, what I did not get a chance to talk about was the application of this method last year that generated the first one-minute videos without explicit human editing measuring industry or academia, as over here. You can just feed the model a storyboard, a long storyboard in text, and it's going to generate a video one minute with all the action plus. And long context is only the easiest form of test time training. I have to move on from the video. Sorry. Now, I also talked about the hard setting. There is no relevant data. We might even have an open research problem. And I talked about my original idea of how to generate data using social provision and how to discover state-of-the-art solutions for scientific problems. What I did not get a chance to talk about was what I did between all these seven years. I worked a lot on robotics in manipulation, locomotion, and video segmentation, which is a primitive for robotics. And even more importantly, the hundreds, not thousands, of direct follow-ups from other people. Just to give you two examples. In serum proving, alpha proof, that was the first model to get an IMO model. And it said in the paper that for P performance, on the most important problems, test time training is crucial. And the same goes for the leading mass proving system today called Aristotel from Harmonic. These are just about all the open documents we have on how the leading mass proving systems work. And really, going back to this slide, there are many methods under the concept of test time training. And most would attribute my paper in 2019 for bringing this concept to deep learning. And this I consider my most important contribution. Okay. So in the future, I believe that's a hard thing. There's no relevant data. It will be the most important problem for test time training. And I believe that you'll be able to reach a system that can spend nine years on a problem. Like Andrew Wiles was proving for mass last serum. Coming up with his own solutions. Judging, using his own aesthetics, how promising each direction is. And eventually reaching a solution. In this direction, I care about, for example, problems without dense rewards. Unlike the kernel runtime stuff before. And these problems like mass and kernel engineering, they exist purely in the digital world. These are, in fact, the simpler problems of the hard setting. The harder problems are when you have interactions in the real world, such as in robotics. And when you have interactions with real users. And how to leverage feedbacks that the robots observe from the real world or from the real users. In the end, I believe that AI can be the Andrew Wiles of the world's most important and hardest problems. Okay. That's all. Thank you. Okay. I think we have time for actually a few questions. While people are thinking I'll start as you say. I think one of the big questions, I think, is this issue of dense reward, especially when you talk about discovery. Andrew Wiles probably was not testing every single thing he did against the math class theorem. He had, as you're saying, insights about what directions are good. Do you have any ideas about how to get AI models to have similar insights, maybe learn this over test time? And to add to your point, even if Andrew Wiles could test every potential proof he comes up with against the theorem, he wouldn't know. He would only get failure, failure, failure all the way for nine years. That's not very informative. So he has to use two things. First, his own judgment of whether this start of a proof is promising. In the LLM analogy, this is like using LLM to give partial feedback for itself. The feedback could take him to the form of word critiques or just a scalar reward for segments of the proof. Now, Andrew Wiles, he would also probably need to solve easier versions of the actual problem. Let's strip the problem down, strip out some of the difficulties, and see what isolate some of the difficult parts of the problem. This would give Wiles a curriculum. So another interesting direction is how to come up with a curriculum. Namely, generate data. One of the distinctions between test and train time in classical machine learning is if you're at train time, you don't keep updating the model, or if you're at test time, you don't keep updating the model. Therefore, you can have lots of parallel use of the model without having different things clobbering. I wonder if you can comment about not single user, but multiple user version of test time training. Is this something that, if you have many people who are running loads like this, you would see simultaneous updates to the model weights from everybody, or you get your own copy of the model, and you have to keep this billion-parameter model sort of separate from everybody else's copy? How do you think about that piece of it? Yeah, this is very interesting. So, you know, if you take an open-source model, just because that's the one I can actually closely observe, such as 1.8b or something, and you run it on 128,000 contexts. So context, you have to update this on a per-user basis, and you measure how long is the list. That's the KV cache that I was showing for attention. And you add up all the KV cache. You see that it actually, just for 128,000 context, it gets to about a billion. Now, if you have 10 times that amount, or like 100 times that amount, you will actually end up having to carry around 100 billion worth of KV cache per user. That's actually much larger than the model itself. So, I think the idea of carrying a model around for each user, a billion model in this case, it does sound a little unreal. The only thing we need to realize is that the baseline now, without doing this, is much more unreal actually. It's just behind the hood. So, it's really that fear of updating your model. In this case, when you have let's say 1 million or 10 million context, it's rather imagined. So, for this phase of my research, I'd like to first explore how, let's suppose we want to go for the cleanest case of one model per user. Does this actually become practical? And later, I think to expand the practicality of this general approach, yes, users that have similar queries, they use similar context, let's say people in the same class or in the same company, whatever, they should share a model. You repeatedly said that classical setup don't change the weights during test time. Let me push back on this. I think that's true. So, for LLMs, OpenAI doesn't change their weights just because I type something in. It would be a terrible idea to do. Same with self-driving cars. You could teach the car something weird. But there is of course online learning. It's the main adaptation, which are basically settings where during test time, you react to the labels you get. So, can you maybe address that a little bit? I think one obvious difference is you have no labels during test time. So, I think that's the main point. But in domain adaptation, there is something called unsupervised domain adaptation. How does this relate to test time training? So, unsupervised domain adaptation, just for people who are not familiar with this setting, I have my training data, let's say it's labeled, and I also have an unlabeled set of training data from a snowy day. Labeled data, from an image net, unlabeled training data on a snowy day. And the way you prepare for a snowy day is to leverage both the labeled data on a regular day and the unlabeled data. Now, this still assumes that you have at least unlabeled data for a snowy day at training time. And in terms of technical difference, for test time training, we need to use a single unlabeled piece of data at test time. That's specifically your test image. You know, you unsupervised domain adaptation, you already people have a set, an unlabeled data set of images from a snowy day. Actually, there is, there has been an area since about 2020, you know, that's called test time domain adaptation. That's when you're given an entire test set of unlabeled images on a snowy day. What do you do? This is sort of combining, you know, domain adaptation and my work. And that's in fact, you know, that's a direct follow up on my paper. Did I answer your question? Cool. Okay, I think we can end here. Let's start your game. 