You wrote this essay in 2019 titled The Bitter Lesson and this is the most influential essay perhaps in the history of AI.
But people have used that as a justification for scaling up LLMs because in their view this is the one scalable way we have found to pour ungodly amounts of compute into learning about the world.
So it's interesting that your perspective is that the LLMs are actually not bitter or less pill.
It's an interesting question whether large language models are are a case of the bitter lesson.
Because they are clearly a way of using massive computation things that will scale with computation up to up to the limits of the internet.
But they're also a way of putting in a lots of human knowledge and so.
So this is an interesting question it's a sociological or industry question will they reach the limits of of of the data and and be superseded by things that that are can get more data just from experience rather than from from people.
, in some ways it's a classic case of the of the of the bitter lesson with the more the more human knowledge we put into the large language models, the better they can do.
So it feels good.
Well I in particular expect there to be systems that can learn from experience and which could well perform much much better and be much more scalable.
In which case it will be another instance of the bitter lesson that the things that that used human knowledge were eventually superseded by things that just trained from experience and computation.
I that doesn't seem like the crux to me because.
I think those people would also agree that the overwhelming amount of compute in the future will come from learning from experience.
They just think that the scaffold or the basis of that the thing you'll start with in order to pour in the compute to do this future experiential learning or on the job learning will be LLMs and.
So I I I still don't understand why this is the wrong starting point altogether why we need a whole new architecture to begin doing experential continual learning and why we can't start with LLMs to do that >>.
well in every case the bitter lesson.
And you know, you could start with human knowledge, >> right?
And then just and then do the scalable things.
Yeah, >> that's always the case.
And there's no never any reason why that has to be bad, >> right?
But in fact and in practice, it has always turned out to be bad because people get locked into the human knowledge approach and.
they psychologically or you know, now I'm.
Now I'm speculating why it is, but this is what has always happened.
they get they get their lunch gets eaten by the methods that are truly scalable.
Give me a sense of what the scalable method is.
The scalable method is you learn from experience.
You you you try things you see what you see what works.
No one no one has to tell you.
First of all you have a goal.
So without a goal there's no sense of right or wrong or better or worse.
So large language models are trying to get by without having a goal or a sense of better or worse.
If you enjoyed this clip, you can watch the full episode here and subscribe for more clips.
